# ‘What could be Feminist about Sound Studies?’: (in)Audibility in Young Children’s Soundwalking

_David Ben Shannon,_

[[Sound]] methods such as soundwalking are increasingly being used across the humanities and social sciences (Ceraso, 2018). Scholars are drawn to such methods for their potential to disrupt the ocular-centrism of Euro-Western knowledge frames (Daza & Gershon, 2015; Moten, 2003). Yet, the interdisciplinary field of _sound studies_, from which such research draws, has been consistently critiqued for its uncritically white and masculine epistemological emphasis (Nyong’o, 2014; Pinto, 2016; Vazquez, 2013). Additionally, it is troubled by its concomitant reification of sound technology (Steingo, 2019), and a generalisation of findings from European societal and cultural frames (Silverstein, 2019; J. Sykes, 2019).

For Alexandra T. Vazquez (2013), this epistemological emphasis is constituted by a masculinist interest in mastering the widest imaginable _sonic_ field; Vazquez proposes ‘listening in detail’ to a smaller, specific range of sonic events rather than claiming audition over the whole field. Samantha Pinto (2016) narrates the emergence of ‘listening in detail’ in [[Composing Paradoxes-Feminist Process - Ingleton]]/feminist sound scholarship, specifically as it relates to diasporic musical productions and their activation of “other fields of cultural production” (Jaji, 2014, p. 20). After Vazquez, Pinto collects four of these works—authored by Edwin C. Hill (2013), Tsitsi Ela Jaji (2014), Shana L. Redmond (2014) and Vazquez (2013)—as _una escuela rara,_ a point of resistance to the sonic “anthological impulse” (Pinto, 2016, p. 179).

Concomitantly, publications that might be collected as [[Black sound studies]] (e.g. Henriques, 2011; Nyong’o, 2014; Weheliye, 2005, 2014), [[Black feminist]] sound studies (e.g. Eidsheim, 2019; Stoever, 2016), and sound scholarship situated within or drawing from the global South (e.g. Steingo & Sykes, 2019) centre music and/or the voice. In emphasizing experiences of—or moments of escape from—white supremacy and misogyny, _una escuela rara_ and other feminist, Black and Southern sound studies centre the anthropocentric _reception_ (i.e. listening) and anthropogenic _production_ of sound: specifically, of music (as diasporic cultural productions) and voice (through which racist/misogynist reception seeks to inscribe the _inessential_ racializing/gendering assemblage as audible, _essential_ traits). This differs from texts in the sound studies canon, which may seek to: flatten the sonic ontology between sources of sound such as voice and music into a less determined sonic field (Thibaud, 2010); and/or adopt a moralism that seeks to filter out anthropogenic sounds as noise (Schafer, 1977/1994); and/or minimise the anthropocentrism of listening by minimising the role of the listening/sounding subject.

Following these crucial critiques, I argue that sound studies’ interest in the mastery of a neutral, and so ‘identity-less’, _sonic_ accounts for its occasional inability to hear marginalised experience; in effect, turning the attention of the ear (or the microphone) away from music and voice, and towards the sonic, relies on a universalist assumption that white aurality is capable of hearing whatever a neutral sonic might sound like.

In this essay, I think-with Pinto’s (2016) question “What’s feminist—what could be feminist—about sound studies, even when it doesn’t “take on” woman as object?” (p. 178). Thinking-with this question, I also ask: “What would a feminist sound studies _listen_ to or for, when marginalization and oppression are achieved in part through making populations inaudible?”

#sound #colonial #feministsoundtheory #Blacksoundtheory

[[colonial]] [[sound studies]] [[sound ecology]] [[x - Soundwalking]]