My research acknowledges the need for the complication of Western environmentalism. Western environmentalism tends to focus on the idea of a "return" - returning nature to what it was before. However, as per A. M. Kanngeiser, the "what it was" of that statment is deliberately vague.
- "The desire for the before-time must always obfuscate its conditions of production, to recognise them would mean to locate it in some context through which it cannot be sustained. In this kind of populist environmentalism from which nature is healing emerges, it is critical that the before-time is seen as pure, authentic" (A.M. Kanngeiser, 2021 - to return)
Regardless of the time period being discussed, nature has never been perfect. To claim it as so is to ignore the presence of Indigenous peoples on this land since time immemorial [find citation]. Nature has always been cultivated and selected - maybe not always intentionally, in the sense of domesticated agriculture - but it has always been influenced by human action and activities (and vice versa). 
- "In the neoliberal sense called upon through the “Nature is healing” claims, which translate most often into conservation, what is being invoked is a more acute policing of nature. As Angela Last suggests, the moves to decentre the human in much ecological work has sought to “reconnect people with the Earth while ignoring their situatedness at sites of colonial trauma.”[14] (Quote Angela Last). Conservation efforts that displace and harm Indigenous communities show that the way nature is defined is contingent on division and eradication.[15]" (AM Kanngeiser, 2021)"
My work aims to take these thoughts into account, and avoid replicating the idea of 'nature as pure'. All sound pieces and thoughts should be understood as trying to express the [word] - not as inspiration or a call to action to return the land to what it was in the 1800s (unless we're talking about land-back, in which case we should absolutely do that), but instead to demonstrate how quickly we (white settlers) have deliberately crafted the landscape to further goals of imperialism, capitalism, and colonialism through steamboats, the timber trade, and settlement.


Shifting-baseline syndrome