https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/social-sciences/ecofeminism

### Ecofeminism

Ecofeminism is one of the most sophisticated and creative philosophical ecologies. Ecofeminist theory (or at least the Anglo-American varieties that have received the most attention) has sometimes been thought of as emphasizing issues of personal life, values, and spirituality. However, important contributions to social and political theory have been made by ecofeminist thinkers, particularly with the emergence of a materialist ecofeminism that is concerned with the global social order and the place of women in the world economy.

Ecofeminist Vandana Shiva is one of the world’s most prominent theoretical critics of the dominant forms of development and globalization. She sees these as a continuation of the project of domination of the ‘other’ (nature, women, indigenous peoples, and subordinate classes) that spans the history of patriarchal, hierarchical civilization. Specifically, she sees development as a transformation of [colonialism](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/social-sciences/colonialism "Learn more about Colonialism from ScienceDirect's AI-generated Topic Pages"). Whereas classical colonialism was carried out by the dominant powers through military conquest and occupation, bureaucratic administration, and ruthless industrial exploitation, neocolonial development achieves many of the same goals by means of national elites and more powerful and advanced technologies. Despite its use of nationalist ideology, it continues the colonialist project of annihilation of traditional culture and methods of production.

Such development, or ‘maldevelopment’ as Shiva calls it, presupposes the reduction of both women and nature to passive objects acted upon by economic and technological forces. This reduction not only takes place in the realm of ideas and values but also encompasses a historical project of pacification and disempowerment of women. Whereas conventional wisdom holds that women are more oppressed in traditional societies and that Westernization and technological and economic development improve their position in many ways, Shiva argues that the reverse is usually the case. Traditional subsistence production depends on greater interdependence and complementarity between men and women, whereas development typically marginalizes women, reduces their status and that of their labor, and increases male dominance. In addition, supposed technological advances impose ecological costs, such as destruction of water and forest resources, that disproportionately affect women and that are not recognized in official indicators.