Kanngieser A and Todd Z 2021 Listening as Relation, an Invocation. CTM Festival: Discourse Series – Critical Modes of Listening, Berlin. 19-31 January

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kGe0DYMroEg&t=4140s

Kanngieser A and Todd Z 2020 From environmental case study to environmental kin study. History and Theory 59(3): 385-393

https://amkanngieser.com/work/from-environmental-case-study-to-environmental-kin-study

https://amkanngieser.com/content/2-work/67-from-environmental-case-study-to-environmental-kin-study/from_environmental_case_study_to_environ.pdf


--- 
Notes
- "explores the relationships among place, knowing, and being in environmental histories"
- "we propose a method of listening and attuning that can attend to the dislocation and abstraction often found in work addressing ecocide and environmental violence. Against the ubiquity of the case-study approach, we propose a method we call “kin study,” which invites more embedded, expansive, material, and respectful relations to people and lands"
- "proposes, though a dialogue, how kin studies may be constituted and applied in studying environmental histories
- "Attention to place and land is vital to careful and reparative historical practices. In this article, we develop the concept of “kin study” to think through a different kind of historical environmental inquiry into place.[1] Kin study attends to the separations that case studies insert between place, thought, and relations. Haudenosaunee and Anishinaabe scholar Vanessa Watts incisively negates Western preoccupations with separating ontology from epistemology, knowing from being, and place from story. As a person from the Great Lakes region of North America, she unfolds an Indigenous conception of onto-epistemology: [H]abitats and ecosystems are better understood as societies from an Indigenous point of view; meaning that they have ethical structures, inter-species treaties and agreements, and further their ability to interpret, understand and implement. Non-human beings are active members of society. Not only are they active, they also directly influence how humans organize themselves into that society. . . . Human thought and action are therefore derived from a literal expression of particular places and historical events in Haudenosaunee and Anishnaabe cosmologies.[2]
- "Similarly, Mohawk scholar Sandra Styres understands place and Land as correlational but notes that the denotation of Land moves far beyond what Western thought attributes to place. She explains: ==Place refers to physical geographic space and is defined by everything that is included in that space—also referred to as landscape, ecology, and/or environment—and is denoted as land (lower case “l”). Connected but distinct, Land (capital “L”) is more than physical geographic space. Land expresses a duality that refers not only to place as a physical geographic space but also to the underlying conceptual principles, philosophies, and ontologies of that space.== This duality is not to be construed as dichotomous, oppositional, or binarial but rather expresses the ways Land embodies two simultaneously interconnected and interdependent conceptualizations. Land as an Indigenous philosophical construct is both space (abstract) and place/land (concrete); it is also conceptual, experiential, relational, and embodied. Placefulness is not something independent from Land but exists within the nuanced contexts of Land. . . . Land is more than the diaphanousness of inhabited memories; Land is spiritual, emotional, and relational; Land is experiential, (re)membered, and storied; Land is consciousness—Land is sentient."
- "Drawing on these examples, it is crucial to reflect on Land and place as sets of relationships between human and nonhuman beings, co-constituting one another. Acknowledging this requires historians studying environmental issues to address the importance of maintaining ethical and reciprocal relationships with Land and place (and all the co-constituents thereof). Anishinaabe scholar Nicholas J. Reo thus articulates what he calls a “kincentric” environmental studies praxis,4 drawing on the work of Enrique Salmón5 : When researchers focus their attention on building and maintaining relationships, the connection between ontology and epistemology in ethnobiology becomes more clear. Rather than pondering what plant ontologies might look like, we can speak to plants. Whether or not as individual researchers we are ready to speak and listen to plants (or animals) directly in our work, we can set up our research collaborations, professional meetings, and classes in ways that make room for and value Indigeneity.6 Such conceptualizations help us critique the way that specific places in Canada and the Pacific have become talking points and data-sheds for scholars in the Global North and colonial academe as they seek to investigate global climate and environmental crises through the past and into the present. Watts, Reo, and Styres demonstrate the need to recognize and respect relationships imbricated through human interactions with specific places. Place, a nonhuman being, is sentient and active. One place cannot stand in for another, as each place is formed through ongoing reciprocal relations. In contrast, Western scholars render places like the Tar Sands in Alberta or the Marshall Islands in the central Pacific Ocean as “case types of the Anthropocene,” which are instrumentalized as metaphors for larger processes and dislocated from their peoples and cultures.
- "The case study as used in historical inquiry is predicated on disassociation of place from thought, as Watts suggests. There may be strategic uses of case studies, as in Indigenous mobilizations of Aboriginal case law in Canada and elsewhere to further Indigenous rights, but we want to flag dangers in the environmental case study as employed in historical and contemporary ecodisaster narratives.7 The case study in Western society is designed to travel—to be applied in future litigation, policy, and debate in contexts far removed from the initial incident. This alienation gives rise to universalization, which does not engage with the specificity and dynamism of place.
- In response to this, we are thinking through practices and ideas of attunement that are foundational to what Zoe Todd calls an environmental “kin study,” drawing on the work of Kim TallBear, Robert Alexander Innes, Brenda McDougall, Reo, and Donna Haraway.8 Attunement is predicated on cultivating a close and generous attention. Through our thinking we ask how kin studies enables us to reposition or re-place case studies. What knowledges might we draw on to define environmental kin studies in a transregional perspective? What do environmental kin studies need from us as researchers? If we admit that our presence, whether local or through invocation over distance, changes the sites we are speaking about, then how can we orientate ourselves ethically when we invoke place in environmental histories?
- The shift from case studies to kin studies requires those writing histories of place to consider the ongoing, co-constitutive, rooted, and flexible nature of place and our relationships to it.9 Transregional environmental kin studies are formed through protocols of attention, listening, and noticing at many interconnected scales. Through dialogue we offer some initial proposals on how kin studies may be constituted and applied in studying histories of earth violence in the Pacific and Western Canada.
- AK: I’m recognized firstly as a white Australian researcher. As time goes on, I am also known as being of German heritage. I’m many other things, too, but these aspects are how I am often initially encountered. Both Germany and Australia have ongoing violent imperial and colonial ties to the Pacific. In Nauru and Papua New Guinea, German words and pronunciations have shaped dialects postoccupation. You can hear the territorialization that these material processes undertake. The question of place, and how to be in and with a place that is haunted by the actions and words of ancestral peoples, is crucial. In both Oceania and Canada, non-Indigenous researchers must be aware of how we occupy and move through unceded sovereign lands if we are to mitigate some of the harm that our history-making does; as Ngāti Awa and Ngāti Porou scholar Linda Tuhiwai Smith writes, we need to recognize “imperialism as a discursive field of knowledge.”10 
- Universal discourses in Western environmental histories are inadequate if they do not recognize that place and land are shaped by relationships that are not interchangeable. When Land is understood in this way, kin studies might proceed.
- ZT: If we take seriously the relationality of the world and ourselves, how might we proceed? There is no single mode of engagement; nor is there any desire on our part to prescribe one, or even to suggest definite parameters. In attempting to practice kin studies in various ways, we can offer up some of our own experiments as points of departure and extension.
"What we need are careful, plural, hyperlocal histories to counter the overwhelmingly white, Eurocentric understandings of global warming that erase the devastation facing minoritized communities."
By tending to environmental challenges at a multiscalar level—thinking through the local as much as the global implications of resource extraction, pollution, and other environmental violence—we are committing to work with place as kin rather than as a substrate from which we take ideas.26 As Reo argues: “Animals can become our teachers and rivers can be our collaborators and coauthors.”27



Thinking with and from place is critical in speaking of historical and contemporary ecocide. This requires moving toward an ethics that recognizes ontoepistemologies as co-constitutive; that acknowledges the importance of laboring with and in place through lasting reciprocal relationships.32 While this brief text prefigures ongoing conceptualizations, we hope that it can already encourage historians and others to think more expansively about how to approach case studies, to move away from modular and abstracted analyses that dispossess people and cultures, and to instead move toward ways of attuning that are more appropriate to the places and environments with which they engage.



==My writing==
Initially this project was meant to encompass the history of the whole Ottawa River during this time - steamboats travelled parts of the whole length, and I wanted to include as much as possible. However, both practicallity and the realization of how unconnected I was with most of the river and its people made me begin to rethink this. I am a visitor in the region - I have no long-lasting or ongoing connection with the area. I did not grow up here, I have no personal or family history here, and I have been nowhere else along the Ottawa River than the city of Ottawa itself. Some people say that you can do the research without ever being to a place, but in response to that I defer to Todd and Kanngieser (2020), who discuss the importance of hyperlocal research in "historical environmental inquiry into place" [a]. They lean on Haudenosaunee and Anishinaabe scholar Vanessa Watts, who "incisively negates Western preoccupations with separating ontology from epistemology, knowing from being, and place from story"[b].

They also present Mohawk scholar Sandra Styres' understanding of "place and Land as correlational but notes that the denotation of Land moves far beyond what Western thought attributes to place. She explains: Place refers to physical geographic space and is defined by everything that is included in that space—also referred to as landscape, ecology, and/or environment—and is denoted as land (lower case “l”). Connected but distinct, Land (capital “L”) is more than physical geographic space. Land expresses a duality that refers not only to place as a physical geographic space but also to the underlying conceptual principles, philosophies, and ontologies of that space"[c].

Given my lack of meaningful experience with both the people, cultures, places, and lived experiences along the river, as well as my lack of ethical access to those spaces (especially given the pandemic) it felt improper for me to speak about places and spaces to which I have no connection.

For that reason, I chose to focus my project solely on the city of Ottawa - a place that I have spent the last two years living in, and engaging with the civic heritage that I am critiquing.





---

[a] Todd and Kanngeiser, 2020
[b] Vanessa Watts, “Indigenous Place-Thought and Agency amongst Humans and Non-Humans (First Woman and Sky Woman Go on a European World Tour!),” Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education & Society 2, no. 1 (2013), 23.
[c] Sandra Styres, “Literacies of Land: Decolonizing Narratives, Storying, and Literature,” in Indigenizing and Decolonizing Studies in Education: Mapping the Long View, ed. Linda Tuhiwai Smith, Eve Tuck, and K. Wayne Yang (New York: Routledge, 2019), 27.  **in Todd and Kanngeiser, 2020**



---
1. Zoe Todd, “From Case-Study to Kin-Study: A Citational Politics for Studying Environmental Violence” (lecture, Postcolonial Tensions: Sciences, Histories, Indigenous Knowledges Workshop, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, April 12–13, 2019). 
2. Vanessa Watts, “Indigenous Place-Thought and Agency amongst Humans and Non-Humans (First Woman and Sky Woman Go on a European World Tour!),” Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education & Society 2, no. 1 (2013), 23.
3. Sandra Styres, “Literacies of Land: Decolonizing Narratives, Storying, and Literature,” in Indigenizing and Decolonizing Studies in Education: Mapping the Long View, ed. Linda Tuhiwai Smith, Eve Tuck, and K. Wayne Yang (New York: Routledge, 2019), 27. 
4. Nicholas J. Reo, “Inawendiwin and Relational Accountability in Anishnaabeg Studies: The Crux of the Biscuit,” Journal of Ethnobiology 39, no. 1 (2019), 66. 
5. Enrique Salmón, “Kincentric Ecology: Indigenous Perceptions of the Human-Nature Relationship,” Ecological Applications 10, no. 5 (2000), 1327-1332. 
6. Reo, “Inawendiwin and Relational Accountability,” 68
7.  and 8 are notes only
9. Watts, “Indigenous Place-Thought”; Styres, “Literacies of Land”; Reo, “Inawendiwin and Relational Accountability.


