# Queering

https://www.journalofglobalindigeneity.com/article/19438-queering-land-based-education-during-covid19
- Hunt  and Holmes  (2015)  define  queering  as  “a  deconstructive  practice  focused  on challenging  normative  knowledges,  identities,  behaviors,  and  spaces  thereby  unsettling  power relations   and   taken-for-granted  assumptions”  (p.  156).  [[connect to shifting baseline syndrome]] As  Indigenous  educators,  our ‘deconstructive  practice’  applies  both  to  what  we  teach  (e.g.,  unpacking  settler-colonial  or Eurocentric constructs or understandings) and to how we teach (e.g., moving teaching and learning out of the classroom and onto the land). We also draw on thework ofHawaiian scholar Kalaniopua Young,who describes‘queering’ as an act of “transforming poison into medicine” (personal communication,  January  18,  2019).  From  that, we understand  queering  as  a  ‘reconstructive practice’, one centred on the radical reclamation and reassertion of our “self-as-relationship” (Wilson,  2001,  p.  91).  This  understanding  of  relationality –a recognition  that,  as  Indigenous people,  we are  constitutedby,  and  responsible  and  accountable  to  our  relationships  with  our ancestors, people here now, and future generations,with the lands, waters, and other living beings; with  the  forces  that  animate  and  sustain  life,and  with  the  ideas,  theories  and  philosophies  that influence our actions -is foundational for Indigenous land-based education.  
- Hunt, S., & Holmes, C. (2015). Everyday decolonization: Living a decolonizing queer politics. Journal of Lesbian Studies, 19(2), 154-172. 10.1080/10894160.2015.970975
- Wilson, A., & Murray, J. (in press). Queering Indigenous land-based education. In Queering eco pedagogies: Sexualities, education and nature. Springer.
