[[x - Walking]] [[x-reflection on walking]] [[x - memory of ottawa river reflection]]

Svensson, Marina. “Walking in the Historic Neighbourhoods of Beijing: Walking as an Embodied Encounter with Heritage and Urban Developments.” _International Journal of Heritage Studies_ 27, no. 8 (August 3, 2021): 792–805. https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2020.1821240. 

- "This article explores walking both as a methodological device, paying close attention to the ethnographer’s own positionality and experiences, and as a form of embodied and emplaced experience of and with heritage sites and urban changes."
- "Walking is an important aspect of how people engage with and experience heritage that draws attention to its emplaced, performative and transformative qualities."
- "City developments and heritigization do not only change modes of walking but may also stimulate more conscious forms of walking, including what has been referred to as conceptual walking, that engages with and/or challenges these developments."
- " De Certau ([2011](https://www-tandfonline-com.proxy.library.carleton.ca/doi/full/10.1080/13527258.2020.1821240#)), for example, argued that walking can generate a more grounded and embodied understanding of everyday life and spatial practices. To walk and observe neighbourhoods, social practices, urban changes, residents’ spatial behaviours, different cultural events and heritage branding, enables one to get a deeper sense of the scale and rhythm of everyday life in the city."
- "The practice of walking exhibits multi-layered, complex and negotiated cultural, social and political features (for a history of walking see Solnit [2001](https://www-tandfonline-com.proxy.library.carleton.ca/doi/full/10.1080/13527258.2020.1821240#)). Who engages in walking and when and where can be differentiated by age, gender, ethnicity, and socio-economic status, and walking is thus a negotiated and often contested practice that reveals power relations and inequalities in society. In Walter Benjamin’s work the _flâneur_ exemplified both the emergence of a new way of walking among certain individuals as well as changes in the city itself (Benjamin [2002](https://www-tandfonline-com.proxy.library.carleton.ca/doi/full/10.1080/13527258.2020.1821240#)). How, where and when one walks, and which routes and paths one chooses to take, does not only reveal something about one’s socio-economic status and gender but also about the nature of the neighbourhood/city, such as how inclusive or exclusive and dangerous it is. Urban policies and heritage and tourism promotion, and mediated images, for example in/through literature, photography and film, also influence how and where we walk."

==City developments and changes such as gentrification, tourism and heritagisation, inevitably have different implications for different groups of people and their walking practices, and walking as a research method can serve as a window to understand these changes. Walking can in these contexts also become an act of resistance, defiance and critique of official urban politics and heritage work (e.g. Solnit [2001](https://www-tandfonline-com.proxy.library.carleton.ca/doi/full/10.1080/13527258.2020.1821240#); Wang and Kao [2017](https://www-tandfonline-com.proxy.library.carleton.ca/doi/full/10.1080/13527258.2020.1821240#)). Walking, in other words, can be a method to both discover and transform the city, and also a method to challenge urban developments and policies.==[[x-reflection on walking]]
- It is obvious that much of our engagement with heritage require walking since heritage is a spatial, emplaced and embodied encounter with the past. Scholars studying heritage and heritagisation processes have thus also come to incorporate walking in their research toolbox (e.g. Goh - Goh, D. P. S. 2014. “Walking the Global City: The Politics of Rhythm and Memory in Singapore.” _Space and Culture_ 17 (1): 16–28. doi:10.1177/1206331212451686.; Low - Low, K. 2017. “Concrete Memories and Sensory Pasts: Everyday Heritage and the Politics of Nationhood.” _Pacific Affairs_ 90 (2): 275–295. doi:10.5509/2017902275.); Wang and Kao - Wang, C., and Y. Kao. 2017. “Re-assembling the Memorial Landscape: The Politics of Walking Tours in Taipei.” _International Journal of Heritage Studies_ 23:10 (10): 1002–1016. doi:10.1080/13527258.2017.1362575.
- The connection between walking and heritage is particularly obvious in city walks and heritage walks/trails that explore urban history, heritage landmarks, art, protest movements, and the lives of different individuals. These walks combine the very act of walking with a close reading of the city, past events, architecture and art. They may focus on well-known sites and history but often also aim to showcase unknown or hidden aspects of the city with the aim to enable people to engage with the city in a more reflexive and participatory way (see e.g. Goh [2014](https://www-tandfonline-com.proxy.library.carleton.ca/doi/full/10.1080/13527258.2020.1821240#); Guano - Guano, E. 2015. “Touring the Hidden City: Walking Tour Guides in Deindustrializing Genoa.” _City and Society_ 27 (2): 160–182. doi:10.1111/ciso.12062.; Wang and Kao [2017](https://www-tandfonline-com.proxy.library.carleton.ca/doi/full/10.1080/13527258.2020.1821240#)).
- "As scholars we simultaneously experience, and are implicated in, place-making processes through walking" (Pink, S. 2008. “An Urban Tour: The Sensory Sociality of Ethnographic Place-making.” _Ethnography_ 9 (2): 175–196. doi:10.1177/1466138108089467.)
- "While my life differed from many of the old residents it had much in common with many of the new Chinese residents in the creative business sector in the area. But I also shared some of the experiences of the old residents and inhabited the same spaces and engaged in many similar walks. My temporary residency created a kind of liminal, in-between position between being a resident and a tourist, and the role as resident cum researcher further reinforced this liminality. At the same time, I could be regarded an example of the new type of privileged middle-class ‘global nomads’ that today move between cities around the world (Kramer, K., and J. R. Short. 2011. “Flânerie and the Globalizing City.” _City_ 15 (3–4): 322–342. doi:10.1080/13604813.2011.595100.)
- Conceptual walks are according to Wunderlich more explicitly reflexive and a creative response to, and way of critically experiencing, the city. These walks are ‘used consciously as a way to get to know the city and uncover[.] features not usually noticed in our everyday life’ (Wunderlich [2008](https://www-tandfonline-com.proxy.library.carleton.ca/doi/full/10.1080/13527258.2020.1821240#), 132). In my case it would for example include walking with activists, heritage experts, and artists.
- I often took photos during my walks because this forced me to become more aware of the physical environment and people’s spatial practices while they later also served as memory prompts (on the photo diary see Chaplin et al. [2004](https://www-tandfonline-com.proxy.library.carleton.ca/doi/full/10.1080/13527258.2020.1821240#); on walking and photography see Pink [2008](https://www-tandfonline-com.proxy.library.carleton.ca/doi/full/10.1080/13527258.2020.1821240#); Cheng [2014](https://www-tandfonline-com.proxy.library.carleton.ca/doi/full/10.1080/13527258.2020.1821240#)).
- Walking in NLGX at the time without knowing much of its history and lacking the ability to read the architecture I missed many aspects of the area’s rich and complex history.
- "They, like my neighbour, view the official heritage discourse as quite distant from their own lives and memories," [[x - memory of ottawa river reflection]]
- "There were groups of people such as beggars who were not welcome in the area, and whose walking thus was regarded as disturbing the public order. Whereas tourists were walking for pleasure and engaged in more leisurely strolling, the patrolling guards and the migrant workers who worked as cleaners was engaged in quite another type of purposeful walking." **need to include a section on the privileges of walking, both currently and in the past